\documentclass[man,floatsintext]{apa6}
\usepackage{lmodern}
\usepackage{amssymb,amsmath}
\usepackage{ifxetex,ifluatex}
\usepackage{fixltx2e} % provides \textsubscript
\ifnum 0\ifxetex 1\fi\ifluatex 1\fi=0 % if pdftex
  \usepackage[T1]{fontenc}
  \usepackage[utf8]{inputenc}
\else % if luatex or xelatex
  \ifxetex
    \usepackage{mathspec}
  \else
    \usepackage{fontspec}
  \fi
  \defaultfontfeatures{Ligatures=TeX,Scale=MatchLowercase}
\fi
% use upquote if available, for straight quotes in verbatim environments
\IfFileExists{upquote.sty}{\usepackage{upquote}}{}
% use microtype if available
\IfFileExists{microtype.sty}{%
\usepackage{microtype}
\UseMicrotypeSet[protrusion]{basicmath} % disable protrusion for tt fonts
}{}
\usepackage{hyperref}
\hypersetup{unicode=true,
            pdftitle={Look who's talking: A comparison of automated and human-generated speaker tags in naturalistic daylong recordings},
            pdfauthor={Federica Bulgarelli~\& Elika Bergelson},
            pdfkeywords={LENA System, talker variability, LENA system reliability},
            pdfborder={0 0 0},
            breaklinks=true}
\urlstyle{same}  % don't use monospace font for urls
\usepackage{natbib}
\bibliographystyle{apalike}
\usepackage{graphicx,grffile}
\makeatletter
\def\maxwidth{\ifdim\Gin@nat@width>\linewidth\linewidth\else\Gin@nat@width\fi}
\def\maxheight{\ifdim\Gin@nat@height>\textheight\textheight\else\Gin@nat@height\fi}
\makeatother
% Scale images if necessary, so that they will not overflow the page
% margins by default, and it is still possible to overwrite the defaults
% using explicit options in \includegraphics[width, height, ...]{}
\setkeys{Gin}{width=\maxwidth,height=\maxheight,keepaspectratio}
\IfFileExists{parskip.sty}{%
\usepackage{parskip}
}{% else
\setlength{\parindent}{0pt}
\setlength{\parskip}{6pt plus 2pt minus 1pt}
}
\setlength{\emergencystretch}{3em}  % prevent overfull lines
\providecommand{\tightlist}{%
  \setlength{\itemsep}{0pt}\setlength{\parskip}{0pt}}
\setcounter{secnumdepth}{0}
% Redefines (sub)paragraphs to behave more like sections
\ifx\paragraph\undefined\else
\let\oldparagraph\paragraph
\renewcommand{\paragraph}[1]{\oldparagraph{#1}\mbox{}}
\fi
\ifx\subparagraph\undefined\else
\let\oldsubparagraph\subparagraph
\renewcommand{\subparagraph}[1]{\oldsubparagraph{#1}\mbox{}}
\fi

%%% Use protect on footnotes to avoid problems with footnotes in titles
\let\rmarkdownfootnote\footnote%
\def\footnote{\protect\rmarkdownfootnote}


  \title{Look who's talking: A comparison of automated and human-generated
speaker tags in naturalistic daylong recordings}
    \author{Federica Bulgarelli\textsuperscript{1}~\& Elika
Bergelson\textsuperscript{1}}
    \date{}
  
\shorttitle{Automated and human-generated speaker tags}
\affiliation{
\vspace{0.5cm}
\textsuperscript{1} Duke University}
\keywords{LENA System, talker variability, LENA system reliability}
\usepackage{csquotes}
\usepackage{upgreek}
\captionsetup{font=singlespacing,justification=justified}

\usepackage{longtable}
\usepackage{lscape}
\usepackage{multirow}
\usepackage{tabularx}
\usepackage[flushleft]{threeparttable}
\usepackage{threeparttablex}

\newenvironment{lltable}{\begin{landscape}\begin{center}\begin{ThreePartTable}}{\end{ThreePartTable}\end{center}\end{landscape}}

\makeatletter
\newcommand\LastLTentrywidth{1em}
\newlength\longtablewidth
\setlength{\longtablewidth}{1in}
\newcommand{\getlongtablewidth}{\begingroup \ifcsname LT@\roman{LT@tables}\endcsname \global\longtablewidth=0pt \renewcommand{\LT@entry}[2]{\global\advance\longtablewidth by ##2\relax\gdef\LastLTentrywidth{##2}}\@nameuse{LT@\roman{LT@tables}} \fi \endgroup}


\DeclareDelayedFloatFlavor{ThreePartTable}{table}
\DeclareDelayedFloatFlavor{lltable}{table}
\DeclareDelayedFloatFlavor*{longtable}{table}
\makeatletter
\renewcommand{\efloat@iwrite}[1]{\immediate\expandafter\protected@write\csname efloat@post#1\endcsname{}}
\makeatother
\usepackage{lineno}

\linenumbers

\authornote{Correspondence: Federica Bulgarelli, 417 Chapel
Drive, Box 90086, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708-0086 USA Email:
\href{mailto:fedebul@gmail.com}{\nolinkurl{fedebul@gmail.com}} Phone:
919-684-9429 This work was supported by NIH grant to EB (DP5
OD019812-01). We wish to thank all of the research assistants at the
University of Rochester and Duke University who coded the talker
producing each utterance, allowing for the analyses in the current
manuscript.

Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Federica
Bulgarelli, 417 Chapel Drive. E-mail:
\href{mailto:fedebul@gmail.com}{\nolinkurl{fedebul@gmail.com}}}

\abstract{
The LENA system has revolutionized research on language acquisition,
providing both a wearable device to collect daylong recordings of
children's environments, and a set of automated outputs that process,
identify, and classify speech using proprietary algorithms. This output
includes information about input sources (e.g.~adult male, electronics).
While this system has been tested across a variety of settings, here we
delve deeper into validating the accuracy and reliability of LENA's
automated diarization, i.e.~tags of who is talking. Specifically, we
compare LENA's output with a gold standard set of manually-generated
talker tags from a dataset of 88 daylong recordings, taken from 44
infants at 6 and 7 months, which includes 57,983 utterances. We compare
accuracy across a range of classifications from the original Lena
Technical Report, alongside a set of analyses examining classification
accuracy by utterance type (e.g.~declarative, singing). Consistent with
previous validations, we find overall high agreement between the human
and LENA-generated speaker tags for adult speech in particular, with
poorer performance identifying child, overlap, noise, and electronic
speech (accuracy range across all measures: 0-92\%). We discuss several
clear benefits of using this automated system alongside potential
caveats based on the error patterns we observe, concluding with
implications for research using LENA-generated speaker tags.


}

\usepackage{amsthm}
\newtheorem{theorem}{Theorem}[section]
\newtheorem{lemma}{Lemma}[section]
\theoremstyle{definition}
\newtheorem{definition}{Definition}[section]
\newtheorem{corollary}{Corollary}[section]
\newtheorem{proposition}{Proposition}[section]
\theoremstyle{definition}
\newtheorem{example}{Example}[section]
\theoremstyle{definition}
\newtheorem{exercise}{Exercise}[section]
\theoremstyle{remark}
\newtheorem*{remark}{Remark}
\newtheorem*{solution}{Solution}
\begin{document}
\maketitle

\hypertarget{introduction}{%
\section{Introduction}\label{introduction}}

Understanding the properties of children's linguistic input and how it
shapes knowledge acquisition has been of interest to researchers for
many decades \citep{Hart1995, Williams1937, Taine1876}. While lab-based
experiments provide valuable information about what children know using
tightly controlled experimental manipulations, information about
naturalistic input is also critically important for understanding how
children learn from their daily environment. The majority of
observational research on language development has been conducted by
collecting video and audio samples of child-caregiver interactions,
alongside painstaking and labor-intensive manual transcription by
trained researchers \citep{Macwhinney2019, Nelson1973}. The widely used
Language ENvironment Analysis system \citep[LENA, LENA Foundation,
Boulder, CO,][]{Greenwood2011} revolutionized this process, combining a
lightweight wearable audio-recorder with a proprietary algorithm that
processes the audio signal. The output of this algorithm then provides
researchers and parents with estimates of a variety of information about
the recorded linguistic input, including adult word counts, child
vocalization counts, and conversational turns between the adult and the
child wearing the recorder (i.e.~the \enquote{target} child).

The LENA system was designed with research, intervention, and clinical
settings in mind; its output can readily provide parents with feedback
about the language their children hear. While a key focus of LENA users
has been word counts and conversational turns \citep{Gilkerson2017}, the
algorithm also exhaustively classifies the input into
\enquote{utterances} across eight different talker categories: target
child, other children, adult males, adult females, overlapping sounds,
noise, electronic sounds, and silence. The source, quantity, and quality
of input play an important role in language development, and indeed LENA
output has been used to identify the relative proportion of speech to
infants coming from speakers of different genders and ages, as well as
from electronics \citep{Christakis2009, Sosa2016, Richards2017}.

One reason characterizing talkers in the input is important concerns
early speech-sound learning. Indeed, an early challenge for young
learners is identifying their language's speech sounds, which requires
deducing the right consonant and vowel categories based on input that
varies across and within talkers, and by phonetic context. Adding to
this challenge, the same speech sound varies acoustically as a function
of distinct vocal characteristics, alongside variables such as gender,
age, topic or dialect \citep{Liberman1967}. Detecting the
\enquote{invariant} (i.e.~relatively stable and consistent) aspects of
the input is an important part of learning language \citep{Gogate2010},
one that is inevitably dependent on the amount and type of variability
infants experience. As talker variability has been posited to be both
beneficial \citep[e.g.~][]{Rost2009}, and to pose a challenge
\citep[e.g.~][]{Mullennix1989, Jusczyk1992} for language learning, the
speaker tags LENA provides are an important information source for
moving theory forward.

However, before confidently using the LENA system's automated output to
study talkers in children's input, it is necessary to establish its
talker classification accuracy. That is, while the opportunity to crunch
1000s of hours of data in just dozens of hours with little human labor
required is enticing, it is critical to understand the limitations of
any automated approach, both for interpretive validity, and to help
guide speech technology improvement. While many labs continue to use
some method of manual annotation to look at variables of interest
\citep[e.g.~][]{Weisleder2013, Soderstrom2013, Bergelson2017, Bergelson2018},
others use the output from the LENA software as ground truth
\citep{Johnson2014b}. Especially since the LENA system has great
potential for facilitating diagnosis and intervention for children at
risk for language delays and deficits, it is imperative to understand
the system's accuracy and error patterns in order to properly interpret
research using LENA output.

Around LENA's initial release, \citet{Xu2009} published a LENA Technical
Report (LTR-05-2) testing the software's accuracy on a test set
consisting of one hour long segments from each of 70 test subjects
ranging from 2-36 months from the LENA Natural Language Study
\citep[building on results in][]{Xu2008}. The hour long segments were
made up of six 10-minute segments identified by an algorithm to include
high levels of speech activity between the target child and an adult.
The test set was analyzed by the LENA proprietary software, and by
trained human transcribers. \citet{Xu2009} compared speaker tags
generated by the LENA software to those generated by the trained human
transcribers across four categories: adult speech, child speech,
television, and other; the system attained 82\%, 76\%, 71\%, and 76\%
accuracy, respectively. Overall, \citet{Xu2009} thus report high levels
of agreement between the LENA proprietary software and trained human
transcribers, noting false negatives for overlapping speech as the
algorithm's greatest source of error.

In a similar endeavor, but using a different tack, Vandam and Silbert
\citeyearpar{Vandam2016} compared LENA's talker-tags with those
generated by 23 trained judges. They obtained day-long LENA recordings
from 26 families with 2.5 year old children, and extracted 30
\enquote{segments} (LENA's proxy for utterances) from three LENA
categories of interest: adult male, adult female, and target child.
These segments were systematically extracted over the course of the day,
to avoid potential skew from oversampled contexts, environments, or
times. All judges tagged each segment (in random order, i.e.~without
context) as child, male, female, or other. In this 4-way categorization
of LENAs three categories, there was high agreement between the trained
judges and the LENA software (weighted Fleiss \(\kappa\) = .68).
Additionally, the authors were able to identify two key error-patterns
in the LENA-generated tags. First, when a segment was tagged as
\enquote{child} by judges but not by the LENA system, the LENA system
generally tagged the segment as \enquote{female} rather than
\enquote{male}. Second, for segments tagged \enquote{female} by judges
but not by the LENA system, the LENA system generally tagged the
segments as male rather than child.

Another study \citep{Lehet2018} investigated the LENA system's accuracy
in classifying speech as speech, with particular interest in classifying
adult speech at a fine granularity. They sampled 15 day-long audio
recordings from children aged 7-33 months, analyzing approximately 30
minutes of audio sampled throughout the day from each recording. Each
LENA segment was also coded by trained annotators as male, female, or
child speech. These manual speaker tags were then compared to
LENA-generated speaker tags every 50ms, revealing 70\% agreement.
Follow-up comparisons revealed that the LENA system was most accurate at
classifying human speech (adult or child) from nonspeech (noise, 76-78\%
accuracy), but less accurate at differentiating between adult speech and
speech from children or electronic devices (68\% accuracy).

Taken together, these three studies (along with others,
e.g.~\citet{Mccauley20}; \citet{Soderstrom}) provide consistent evidence
that LENA's proprietary software is fairly accurate at classifying
speech relative to trained human coders, while highlighting a variety of
systematic mistakes. However, the literature to date leaves three clear
gaps that the current work fills.

First, across these previous studies, the annotaters heard
decontextualized clips and/or had little familiarity with the families.
This critically differs from the infants' own experiences of their day,
where activities and interactions have a coherent context and order, and
are set against a firm basis of experience with particular key
caretakers. To better approximate infants' experiences, we use manual
annotations created by listening to the entire day in order (except
nap-times), by researchers who know individual families well. This
provides a contextual coherence to the tags, and protects against biases
that emerge when listening to unknown talkers. For instance, someone
familiar with a family may know that there is a toddler in addition to
the target child, and that the grandmother, who is the primary
caretaker, has a relatively deep voice. A naive annotator or algorithm
couldn't know this information, and thus will likely make errors in
attributing child vocalizations to the key vs.~other child, or will use
the (generally reliable) proxy that deeper voices belong to men rather
than women.

Second, all of these previous studies used recordings from large age
ranges (from 2-36 months), and either collapsed across all child
categories \citep[target vs.~other child,][]{Xu2009} or only
investigated accuracy on one of the categories \citep[target
child,][]{Vandam2016}. Across this developmental period children go from
not producing any speech, to being active participants in conversation.
Understanding the LENA system's accuracy in determining the source of
child speech is critical, given that a primary goal of the LENA system
is to collect information about child vocalizations and turn-taking to
assess and promote language development. For example, if the LENA system
has difficulty distinguishing between the target child and other
children in the environment, these types of data can give a misleading
assessment of the target child's vocal maturity in settings with more
than one child present. This may be particularly problematic in low-SES
settings, where family size tends to be larger, and caretaking more
often involves multiple children \citep{Division2015}.

Lastly, while many previous evaluations of the LENA software focused on
portions of recordings with a high density of speech, the type or
content of this speech is not considered in identifying the speaker. A
recent investigation of the availability of both child directed and
adult directed speech in infants' input over the first two years of life
\citep{BergelsonCasillas} found differences in accuracy in identifying
speaker gender depending on child or adult directed speech. For child
directed speech, the LENA algorithm misclassified a male speaker as
female 10\% of the time, but only misclassified a female speaker as male
4\% of the time. Whereas for adult directed speech, a female speaker was
mislabeled as male 34\% of the time, while a male speaker was only
mislabeled as female 22\% of the time. These errors likely stem from
child directed speech being characterized by overall higher pitch,
making it more difficult for algorithms to differentiate child directed
male speech from adult directed female speech.

Other aspects of the speech content itself can also potentially impact
the algorithm's accuracy. For example, declarative statements and
questions are marked by different intonational contours, which primarily
include changes in fundamental frequency \citep{Lieberman1967}. As with
child directed speech, it is therefore reasonable to expect that
utterance-type may also impact talker classification by the LENA
software. Indeed, different utterance-types have been proposed to serve
different roles for language acquisition. For instance, words in
single-word utterances or at the beginnings and ends of sentences
(edges) have been proposed to scaffold segmentation
\citep{Brent2001, Johnson2014a}, while prosodic patterns of longer
utterances can highlight syntactic boundaries
\citetext{\citealp{Nelson1989}; \citealp[see][]{Soderstrom2007}}.
Questions, in turn, have particular prosody, with yes/no questions in
particular suggested to support auxiliary development
\citep{Gleitman1984}. Situational contexts like reading and singing also
have particular prosody and content. For instance, singing, a common
caretaking activity with parallels to infant directed speech
\citep{Trehub1993}, may pose a challenge for automated systems given its
wider contour range. Finally, reading has been a particular focus in
early language development, and features a distinctively wider range of
words and grammatical constructions, and prosody
\citep{Montag2015, Debaryshe1993}. Taken together, understanding how
context, and inevitable variability in utterance-type, impact talker
classification is relevant for language development more generally.

Filling these gaps, the current study uses a recently collected
longitudinal corpus, the SEEDLingS corpus \citep{Bergelson} to
investigate LENA software-generated talker tags taken from a set of
day-long longitudinal audio recordings of 44 typically-developing
infants in a North American city. We restrict the current analyses to
segments where trained researchers identifed that a noun was spoken to
the target child, by a person, toy, or electronic device, and the type
of utterance the noun was spoken in. We focus on instances of concrete
nouns, given their high prevalence in early vocabulary
\citep{Braginsky2017}\footnote{Further details about the generalizability of our noun-centric analysis is taken up in the Discussion}.
Furthermore, unlike previous investigations, we restrict our analysis to
day-long recordings from 6 and 7 months of age, which allows us to
investigate the child tags when the target child is not yet producing
words, making it easier to identify patterns of mistakes in labeling
target or other child utterances. Taken together, this paper goes beyond
previous work in by comparing LENA algorithm speaker tags to those
produced by trained researchers highly familiar with the context and
individuals in the recordings, in a relatively large sample of
pre-verbal infants.

\hypertarget{methods}{%
\section{Methods}\label{methods}}

\hypertarget{participants}{%
\subsection{Participants}\label{participants}}

Participants were 44 infants recruited for a large scale, year-long
study of word learning. All infants were born full term (40±3 weeks),
had no known vision or hearing problems, and heard English \(\geq75\%\)
of the time. 75\% of the infants' mothers had a B.A. or higher, and 95\%
of the infants were Caucasian. Over the course of the year-long study
starting when infants were 6 months of age, families were recorded using
LENA once a month for an entire day, and video recorded once a month for
an hour. For the purpose of the current study, only the audio recordings
from 6 and 7 months were used, as these were the only portions of the
data where the entire day was manually annotated. See
\citet{Bergelson2018} for a fuller description of the data and
\citet{Bergelson} to access the recordings directly. \pagebreak

\hypertarget{procedure}{%
\subsection{Procedure}\label{procedure}}

\hypertarget{home-recordings-and-initial-data-processing}{%
\subsubsection{Home recordings and Initial Data
Processing}\label{home-recordings-and-initial-data-processing}}

Researchers obtained monthly audio recordings capturing up to 16 hours
of infants' language input each month. Parents were given small LENA
audio recorders (LENA Foundation), and infant-sized vests with built-in
pockets to house the LENA recorder. Parents were asked to have their
child wear the vest and the LENA recorder from the time they woke up
until they went to sleep for the night, except for naps and bath times.
Parents were permitted to pause the recorder, but were asked to minimize
these pauses.

Audio recordings were processed by LENA proprietary software, which
segments each file and diarizes it (i.e.~demarcates the onset and offset
of every \enquote{utterance} and assigns it one of the eight talker-tags
in its inventory,
\citep{Xu2008}).\footnote{N.B. While the LENA technical report (Xu et al., 2009) states accuracy for the talker tags, as described in text, it does not report accuracy on the segment identification process, i.e. whether a human would agree with the utterance boundaries identified by LENA, regardless of talker.}
The output from the LENA proprietary software was converted to CLAN
format \citep{MacWhinney2010}. In-house scripts were used to mark long
periods of silence (such as naps) in the raw audio files, without
information from the LENA software. Research assistants subsequently
verified the edges of these long periods of silence using visual
inspection of the
waveform.\footnote{Process detailed here: https://bergelsonlab.gitbook.io/project/seedlings-annotations/audio-processing}
Subsequently these files were used for manual language annotation.
Original audio recordings were modally 16 hrs (LENA's maximum capacity).
After removing long silences, the recordings were \textasciitilde10 hrs
(Mode = 654 min, Mean = 603 min, SD = 106.8, Range = 385.2-951 min, see
\citet{Bergelson2018})

\hypertarget{manual-annotation}{%
\subsubsection{Manual Annotation}\label{manual-annotation}}

Trained researchers listened to the full daylong recording, and within
each utterance delimited by the LENA software, annotated each concrete
noun said directly to or near the target child. Specifically, concrete
noun tags were placed within timestamps delimited by the LENA software
as utterances. However, multiple concrete nouns could occur within a
single utterance delimited by LENA, or across utterance boundaries (in
which case they were included in the timestamp where the majority of the
word occurred). Based on the goals of the broader project, which
examines noun acquisition \citep{Bergelson2017}, trained researchers
tagged easily imageable concrete nouns that could be visually
represented, and included objects such as body parts (i.e.~arm, leg) and
foods (i.e.~milk, cracker), but did not include occupations
(e.g.~teacher), or proper
nouns.\footnote{Further details here: https://bergelsonlab.gitbook.io/project/seedlings-annotations/annotation-notes-1}
Concrete nouns produced in the distance (such as faint background
television) were not included. Each concrete noun instance was labeled
alongside its utterance-type, a tag for whether the referent of the noun
was present, and individual talker labels \citep[see][]{Bergelson2018}.
The current analysis focuses primarily on the talker label, which tagged
concrete nouns from any talker (live interlocutors and electronics), and
on the utterance-type, which labeled the utterance as one of the
following: declarative, imperative, reading, singing, short phrase
(i.e.~less than three words with no verb, see \citet{Bergelson2018}).

Each talker was labeled with a unique identifier describing that
specific talker. For example, mom was always MOT and maternal
grandmother was always GRM, while other speakers' 3-letter codes
indicated whether they were an adult or child, and male or female. The
same label was used throughout the recordings for recurrent talkers
(e.g.~Aunt Sarah might be AFS for a given infant.) Unique 3-letter codes
were also used when a word was spoken by multiple simultaneous talkers
(e.g.~mom and dad said \enquote{ball} at the same time). Each talker tag
was created and checked by two different RAs initially. It then
underwent a final check by a trained researcher highly familiar with
each family (i.e.~who could identify each individual talker present in
the recordings and know, e.g.~that a given family had 2 older brothers);
this researcher confirmed the set of talker-tags for each child was
accurate and consistent across recordings each month. The current
dataset thus includes an average of 1,317.80 tags per child (SD =
620.05, Mode = 1,123.28, Range = 292-2726) for which we have both a
LENA-generated and manual speaker tag.

\hypertarget{converting-talker-annotations-to-lena-generated-speaker-tags}{%
\subsubsection{Converting talker annotations to LENA-generated speaker
tags}\label{converting-talker-annotations-to-lena-generated-speaker-tags}}

In order to compare the talker tags produced by trained research
assistants with those produced by the proprietary LENA software, we
reclassified our unique talker-tags to match those produced by the LENA
software: female or male adult, target or other child, electronic, and
overlap. Utterances labeled as electronic were produced exclusively by
toys or television. The overlap category consisted of utterances
produced by any two sources (e.g.~two adults, a child and singing toy,
etc.). Across the main set of analyses, we do not consider utterances
labeled as noise or silence by the LENA algorithm, as our codes did not
reflect this category. In the penultimate section of the results, we
return to these to identify the types of utterances labeled as noise or
silence by the LENA
algorithm.\footnote{N.B. The LENA algorithm provides 'far' and 'near' versions of all tags except silence, LENAs own reported classification accuracy uses only near-field utterances, and we follow suit (Xu et al., 2009).}
Finally, in order to assess inter-rater reliability for our human
annotations, researchers blind to the existing tags coded 3150
concrete-noun instances (5\% of the entire corpus) using speaker tags
equivalent to those used by LENA: male adult, female adult, child,
electronic or overlap. Reliability was high: accuracy = 96.56, kappa =
0.93.

\hypertarget{data-analysis}{%
\subsection{Data analysis}\label{data-analysis}}

We used R and RStudio \citep[Version 3.4.3;][]{R-base}\footnote{We used
  \emph{bindrcpp} \citep[Version 0.2.2;][]{R-bindrcpp}, \emph{broom}
  \citep[Version 0.5.0;][]{R-broom}, \emph{caret} \citep[Version
  6.0.80;][]{R-caret}, \emph{childesr} \citep[Version
  0.1.0;][]{R-childesr}, \emph{dplyr} \citep[Version
  0.8.0.1;][]{R-dplyr}, \emph{ggplot2} \citep[Version
  3.1.0;][]{R-ggplot2}, \emph{ggpubr} \citep[Version 0.2;][]{R-ggpubr},
  \emph{irr} \citep[Version 0.84.1;][]{R-irr}, \emph{janitor}
  \citep[Version 1.1.1;][]{R-janitor}, \emph{kableExtra} \citep[Version
  1.0.1;][]{R-kableExtra}, \emph{knitr} \citep[Version
  1.21;][]{R-knitr}, \emph{magrittr} \citep[Version
  1.5;][]{R-magrittr},\emph{papaja} \citep[Version
  0.1.0.9842;][]{R-papaja}, \emph{purrr} \citep[Version
  0.3.2;][]{R-purrr}, and \emph{tidyverse} \citep[Version
  1.2.1;][]{R-tidyverse}.}, to generate this manuscript, along with all
figures and analyses. All code and data are already available
(\url{https://github.com/fedebul/BulgarelliBergelson_BehavioralResearchMethods2019}).

In order to compare our results to those published in the original LENA
technical report (LTR), we analyze the results of a series of confusion
matrices. First, we analyze the four higher-level categories (adult,
child, electronic, overlap), as in previous validations \citep{Xu2009}.
Next we compare the LENA algorithm's performance on specific subsets of
the data. Specifically, we look for cases where human coders and the
LENA speaker tags agree that the speech segments are one of two
categories: adult vs.~child tags, male vs.~female adult tags, target
child vs.~other child tags, and electronic vs.~overlap tags. This allows
us to investigate specific error patterns. For example, for the adult
vs.~child comparison we can ask: given agreement that the speaker is
human, how accurate was the LENA algorithm at correctly identifying
whether the speaker was an adult or child? For the electronic
vs.~overlap comparison we can ask: having established that the signal is
not clear human speech, how accurate is the LENA algorithm at
identifying its source? Further, as we only included segments that were
identified by annotators as being spoken by a human, toy or electronic,
we investigate LENA system's use of the noise and silence tags. Lastly,
for each of these comparisons we investigate whether the LENA
algorithm's accuracy is dependent on the type of utterance for each
segment, based on the manual utterance-type tags (for which there is no
LENA system equivalent).

In all cases, manual tags are used as the gold standard against which
the LENA-generated tags are assessed. We report accuracy (\% agreement
and Cohen's \(\kappa\)), alongside recall, precision and F1. Percent
agreement reflects overall accuracy (\# of \emph{correct} tags/\# of all
tags), while Cohen's \(\kappa\) takes into account chance agreement due
to randomly guessing, or always choosing a single response. Recall is
operationalized as the rate of correct predictions divided by the total
number of actual instances. Precision is our measure of correct
identification. For example, for checking accuracy in classifying adult
vs.~child speech, recall would be: (\# of \emph{correct} LENA adult
tags)/(\# of Manual adult tags), while precision would be: (\# of
\emph{correct} LENA adult tags)/(total \# of LENA adult tags). Lastly,
F1 is a weighted average of the recall and precision, with 1 reflecting
perfect accuracy.

\hypertarget{results}{%
\section{Results}\label{results}}

Table \ref{tab:number-of-tags} shows the number of utterances in each
talker category as tagged manually and by the LENA software. Overall,
LENA-generated talker tags and the manual talker tags were moderately
correlated, (n = 57983, Kendall's \(\tau\)=0.35, \emph{p} \textless{}
.001).

\begin{table}[H]
\begin{center}
\begin{threeparttable}
\caption{\label{tab:number-of-tags}Nouns in each category, by tag source}
\small{
\begin{tabular}{lll}
\toprule
Speaker type & \multicolumn{1}{c}{Human codes} & \multicolumn{1}{c}{LENA codes}\\
\midrule
Adult & 51,097 & 39,532\\
Child & 3,022 & 6,331\\
Electronic & 3,165 & 2,702\\
Overlap & 699 & 9,418\\
Total & 57,983 & 57,983\\
\bottomrule
\end{tabular}
}
\end{threeparttable}
\end{center}
\end{table}

\hypertarget{classifying-lena-generated-vs.-human-generated-adult-child-electronic-and-overlap-tags}{%
\subsubsection{Classifying LENA-generated vs.~Human-generated adult,
child, electronic, and overlap
tags}\label{classifying-lena-generated-vs.-human-generated-adult-child-electronic-and-overlap-tags}}

We first analyzed accuracy for all of the speaker tags that were
classified as adult, child, electronic or overlap. Across the four
categories, the LENA system's overall accuracy was 0.72, Cohen's
\(\kappa\) = 0.28. The confusion matrix results for these categories can
be found in Figure \ref{fig:comp-matrix-plot} and Table
\ref{tab:comprehensive-matrix-tables}. The LENA technical report
\citep{Xu2009} reports sensitivityin classifying each category, which
here can be compared directly to recall from the confusion matrix. In
all cases, our results show lower agreement percentages (by 1-38\%) than
the LENA technical report.

\begin{table}[H]
\begin{center}
\begin{threeparttable}
\caption{\label{tab:comprehensive-matrix-tables}Recall, precision and F1 for all four categories and comparison to Lena Technical Report sensitivity estimates}
\begin{tabular}{lllll}
\toprule
Type & \multicolumn{1}{c}{Recall} & \multicolumn{1}{c}{Precision} & \multicolumn{1}{c}{F1} & \multicolumn{1}{c}{LTR Report}\\
\midrule
Adult & 0.75 & 0.97 & 0.85 & 0.82\\
Child & 0.57 & 0.27 & 0.37 & 0.76\\
Electronic & 0.46 & 0.54 & 0.49 & 0.71\\
Overlap & 0.38 & 0.03 & 0.05 & 0.76\\
\bottomrule
\end{tabular}
\end{threeparttable}
\end{center}
\end{table}

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics{LTR_manuscript_files/figure-latex/comp-matrix-plot-1.pdf}
\caption{\label{fig:comp-matrix-plot}Confusion matrix displaying recall for
LENA-generated labels compared to Human-generated labels. Each column
constitutes all of the instances labeled by human coders as belonging to
that category. Each cell displays how LENA software tags were labeled
for each human category, as well the total number of segments in each
cell. Darker colors represent a higher proportion of LENA software
tags.}
\end{figure}

Descriptively, when the LENA algorithm misclassified adult speech, it
was most likely to classify it as overlap (15\%). Similarly, when it
misclassified child speech, it was most likely to classify it as overlap
(23\%) or adult speech (19\%). Electronic speech was most likely to be
misclassified as overlap (28\%), and overlap speech was most likely to
be misclassified as adult (29\%). From these results, and consistent
with the technical report, we can draw the preliminary conclusion that
the LENA algorithm is overly sensitive to overlapping sounds, relative
to human annotaters.

Despite lower agreement in the current dataset than in the LTR, we do
find a significant (non-parametric) correlation across the proportion of
the LENA system tags for each human tag category between these data and
the percentages reported in the LTR for the equivalent confusion matrix
(i.e.~Figure \ref{fig:comp-matrix-plot}), n= 16, Kendall's
\(\tau\)=0.74, \emph{p} \textless{} .001.

Finally, we assessed whether accuracy varied as a function of
utterance-type. Accuracy was operationalized as correct (scored
\enquote{1}) if the LENA-generated tag matched the human tag and
incorrect (scored \enquote{0}) if it did not. We then conducted a
logistic regression with accuracy as the dependent variable and
utterance-type (Declarative, Imperative, Short Phrase, Question, Reading
or Singing) as a predictor. Utterance-type was significant
\(\chi^2 = (5, N=57982)\) \emph{p} \textless{} .001. As can be seen in
Table \ref{tab:utterance-glm} and Figure \ref{fig:utterance-type-plot}
the LENA software is incorrect nearly half of the time for Singing
utterances, and most accurate on Reading utterances. We return to these
descriptive differences in the discussion.

\begin{table}[H]
\begin{center}
\begin{threeparttable}
\caption{\label{tab:utterance-glm}Number of correctly and incorrectly classified segments by utterance-type and proportion correct across the four main categories: adult, child, electronic or overlap.}
\begin{tabular}{llll}
\toprule
UtteranceType & \multicolumn{1}{c}{Incorr} & \multicolumn{1}{c}{Corr} & \multicolumn{1}{c}{\%Corr}\\
\midrule
Declarative & 7,009 & 21,221 & 0.75\\
Imperative & 1,106 & 2,405 & 0.68\\
Short Phrase & 1,745 & 3,049 & 0.64\\
Question & 2,953 & 8,252 & 0.74\\
Reading & 995 & 3,661 & 0.79\\
Singing & 2,377 & 3,209 & 0.57\\
\bottomrule
\end{tabular}
\end{threeparttable}
\end{center}
\end{table}

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics{LTR_manuscript_files/figure-latex/utterance-type-plot-1.pdf}
\caption{\label{fig:utterance-type-plot}Classification accuracy distribution
by utterance-type across the four main categories: adult, child,
electronic or overlap. The box plot reflects the median of the means for
each infant for each utterance-type. Each point (jittered horizontally)
represents one child; diamonds (unjittered) indicate outliers.}
\end{figure}

\hypertarget{classifying-adult-vs.-child-tags}{%
\subsubsection{Classifying adult vs.~child
tags}\label{classifying-adult-vs.-child-tags}}

The next confusion matrix compared adult and child tags (excluding other
LENA-generated or manual tags). Thus, this analysis investigates
accuracy when both human coders and the LENA algorithm agree that the
speaker is human, and omit overlap and electronic tags from
consideration. The LENA system achieved 0.90 accuracy, Cohen's
\(\kappa\) = 0.38. Recall for this classification is 0.90, while
precision is 0.98. The F1 weighted score is 0.94. The error patterns
reveal that the LENA system is more likely to misclassify child speech
as adult than adult speech as child, see Figure
\ref{fig:all-comparison-plot}. While the accuracy for this
classification is quite high, it's worth noting the large discrepency
between accuracy and \(\kappa\), which takes into account the chance of
correctly guessing.

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics{LTR_manuscript_files/figure-latex/all-comparison-plot-1.pdf}
\caption{\label{fig:all-comparison-plot}Confusion matrix displaying
proportion correct (i.e.~recall) for LENA-generated labels compared to
Human-generated labels. Each column constitutes all of the instances
labeled by human coders. Each cell displays how the LENA system tags
were labeled for each human category, as well the total number of
segments in each cell. Darker colors represent a higher proportion of
LENA system tags.}
\end{figure}

Here too, a logistic regression showed that utterance-type accounted for
significant variance in classifying adult and child speech
\(\chi^2 = (5, N=45014)\), \emph{p} \textless{} .001. As can be seen in
Table \ref{tab:utterance-glm-all} and Figure
\ref{fig:utterance-type-plot-all} the LENA software is least correct at
distinguishing between adult and child speech for singing utterances,
and most correct for declaratives, though overall accuracy was quite
high (80\%-- 92\%).

\begin{table}[t]

\caption{\label{tab:utterance-glm-all}Number of correctly and incorrectly classified segments by utterance-type and proportion correct for all 2-way comparisons}
\centering
\resizebox{\linewidth}{!}{
\fontsize{50}{52}\selectfont
\begin{tabular}{c>{\centering\arraybackslash}p{3em}>{\centering\arraybackslash}p{3em}>{\centering\arraybackslash}p{3em}|>{\centering\arraybackslash}p{3em}>{\centering\arraybackslash}p{3em}>{\centering\arraybackslash}p{3em}|>{\centering\arraybackslash}p{3em}>{\centering\arraybackslash}p{3em}>{\centering\arraybackslash}p{3em}|>{\centering\arraybackslash}p{3em}>{\centering\arraybackslash}p{3em}>{\centering\arraybackslash}p{3em}}
\toprule
\multicolumn{1}{c}{ } & \multicolumn{3}{c}{Adult vs. Child} & \multicolumn{3}{c}{Male vs. Female} & \multicolumn{3}{c}{Target vs. Other child} & \multicolumn{3}{c}{Electronic vs. Overlap} \\
\cmidrule(l{3pt}r{3pt}){2-4} \cmidrule(l{3pt}r{3pt}){5-7} \cmidrule(l{3pt}r{3pt}){8-10} \cmidrule(l{3pt}r{3pt}){11-13}
UtteranceType & Incorr & Corr & \%Corr & Incorr & Corr & \%Corr & Incorr & Corr & \%Corr & Incorr & Corr & \%Corr\\
\midrule
Declarative & 1933 & 21136 & 0.92 & 2288 & 18350 & 0.89 & 175 & 654 & 0.79 & 112 & 88 & 0.44\\
Imperative & 399 & 2384 & 0.86 & 228 & 2120 & 0.90 & 19 & 51 & 0.73 & 36 & 22 & 0.38\\
Short Phrase & 592 & 3024 & 0.84 & 346 & 2338 & 0.87 & 139 & 306 & 0.69 & 96 & 26 & 0.21\\
Question & 959 & 8232 & 0.90 & 615 & 7463 & 0.92 & 44 & 180 & 0.80 & 27 & 22 & 0.45\\
Reading & 368 & 3656 & 0.91 & 391 & 3246 & 0.89 & 5 & 18 & 0.78 & 2 & 5 & 0.71\\
\addlinespace
Singing & 474 & 1857 & 0.80 & 207 & 1549 & 0.88 & 26 & 107 & 0.80 & 696 & 1551 & 0.69\\
\bottomrule
\end{tabular}}
\end{table}

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics{LTR_manuscript_files/figure-latex/utterance-type-plot-all-1.pdf}
\caption{\label{fig:utterance-type-plot-all}Classification accuracy
distribution by utterance-type. Each point (jittered horizontally)
represents one child; diamonds (unjittered) indicate outliers. N.B. not
all participants contributed data to each utterance type for each
comparison.}
\end{figure}

\hypertarget{classifying-male-vs.-female-adult-speech}{%
\subsubsection{Classifying male vs.~female adult
speech}\label{classifying-male-vs.-female-adult-speech}}

We next investigated accuracy in labeling talker gender. This analysis
only included tags labeled as male or female adults by both the LENA
algorithm and human coders, and excluded children, electronics and
overlap. The LENA system classified male and female speech with 0.90
accuracy, Cohen's \(\kappa\) = 0.70. Recall for this classification was
0.93, while precision was 0.94. The F1 weighted score was 0.93. The
error patterns reveal that the LENA system is more likely to misclassify
male speech as female speech than female speech as male speech. Indeed,
female speech constitutes 79\% of adult speech in the current data set
(see Figure \ref{fig:all-comparison-plot}), a point we return to in the
discussion.

Again, a logistic regression found that utterance-type accounted for
significant variability in classification accuracy, here for male
vs.~female speech \(\chi^2 = (5, N=39141)\), \emph{p}\textless{} .001.
While the effect of utterance-type was significant, as can be seen in
Table \ref{tab:utterance-glm-all} and Figure
\ref{fig:utterance-type-plot-all}, the LENA software is quite accurate
at distinguishing male and female speech. Given accuracy differences
only ranging from 87\% -- 92\%, utterance-type differences here should
probably be interpretted gingerly.

\hypertarget{classifying-child-speech}{%
\subsubsection{Classifying child
speech}\label{classifying-child-speech}}

Our next analysis examined the LENA algorithm's target versus other
child tags. Specifically, this analysis investigated tags labeled as
children by both the LENA software and manual annotation. Notably, as
the current data set only included target children at 6 and 7 months of
age (well before word production has begun in even the most precocious
talkers) there are no instances of concrete nouns tagged as the target
child by human annotators. As a result, this analysis differs from the
other confusion matrices, as it can only evaluate LENA agreement for
tags labeled as other children by humans. As such, 0/410 of the
LENA-generated target child tags were correct, since there were no nouns
produced by the target child in the dataset. The LENA system classifies
speech from the target child relative to other children with 0.76
accuracy. Recall for this classification is 0.76, while precision is 1,
because all LENA-generated \enquote{other child} tags were correct. The
F1 weighted score is 0.87. See Figure \ref{fig:all-comparison-plot}.

A logistic regression investigating whether utterance-type accounts for
significant variance again found that it did so, here for classifying
target vs.~other child speech \(\chi^2 = (5, N=1724)\), \emph{p} = .001.
As can be seen in in Table \ref{tab:utterance-glm-all} and Figure
\ref{fig:utterance-type-plot-all}, the LENA algorithm was least correct
at distinguishing between target and other child speech for words in
short phrases (69\%), and most correct for questions (80\%) and singing
(80\%).

\hypertarget{classifying-electronic-and-overlap-categories}{%
\subsubsection{Classifying electronic and overlap
categories}\label{classifying-electronic-and-overlap-categories}}

Our next analysis investigated classification accuracy for instances
labeled as electronic or overlap by both the LENA system and human
coders. Thus, this analysis addresses the LENA system's accuracy at
classifying speech coming from a source other than a single live talker.
The LENA algorithm classifies speech from the electronic category
relative to the overlap category with 0.64 accuracy, Cohen's \(\kappa\)
= 0.19. Recall for this classification is 0.62, while precision is 0.95.
The F1 weighted score is 0.75, see Figure \ref{fig:all-comparison-plot}.

Electronic vs.~overlap speech classification accuracy too was
significantly predicted by utterance-type in a logistic regression
\(\chi^2 = (5, N= 2683)\), \emph{p} \textless{} .001. As can be seen in
Table \ref{tab:utterance-glm-all} and Figure
\ref{fig:utterance-type-plot-all}, LENA-generated tag accuracy was
lowest when distinguishing between electronic and overlap speech for
short phrases, and highest for reading (21\% and 71\%, respectively).

\hypertarget{classifying-lena-generated-noise-and-silence-tags}{%
\subsubsection{Classifying LENA-generated noise and silence
tags}\label{classifying-lena-generated-noise-and-silence-tags}}

\begin{table}[H]
\begin{center}
\begin{threeparttable}
\caption{\label{tab:other-errors}Human-generated speaker tag for LENA-generated noise and silence categories}
\begin{tabular}{lll}
\toprule
Type & \multicolumn{1}{c}{Noise} & \multicolumn{1}{c}{Silence}\\
\midrule
Adult & 97 & 322\\
Child & 1 & 8\\
Electronic & 24 & 67\\
Overlap & 2 & 1\\
Total & 124 & 398\\
\bottomrule
\end{tabular}
\end{threeparttable}
\end{center}
\end{table}

All of the analyses thus far have excluded instances that were
classified as noise or silence by the LENA software, which total 522
instances, i.e.~0.90\% of the total data. As the trained human coders
did not use these categories, we now investigate who was talking when
these tags were used by the LENA algorithm. As can be seen in Table
\ref{tab:other-errors}, the majority of the time the LENA algorithm
labeled an utterance as noise or silence it was labeled as an adult
utterance by trained researchers. In their technical report,
\citet{Xu2009} acknowledge that human coders are likely to be better at
identifying human speech in noise, and therefore excluded any tags
labeled as noise from their analyses. Our results offer convergent
support for this hypothesis, though we note that as only a small portion
of data falls in this category (\textless1\%), this seems largely
unproblematic for the LENA system's speaker-tag validity.

\hypertarget{establishing-viability-of-concrete-nouns-as-a-proxy-for-all-input}{%
\subsubsection{Establishing Viability of Concrete Nouns as a Proxy for
All
Input}\label{establishing-viability-of-concrete-nouns-as-a-proxy-for-all-input}}

Given that the current dataset includes only instances of concrete
nouns, it is worth assessing whether concrete nouns are a reasonable
proxy for language input in the context of talker classification. We
first examined noun prevalence within the Brent corpus. We find that
5.60\% of utterances in Brent contain a noun (concrete or otherwise)
\citep{Sanchez2019, Brent2001}, and that nouns represent 13.40\% of word
tokens. Convergently, using LENA's automated Adult Word Count (AWC)
estimates as a proxy for word tokens in the current dataset, we find
that the concrete nouns we include are \textasciitilde3.49\% of the
total word tokens. In order to establish whether concrete nouns are
representative of the day-long recordings despite being a small
proportion of the input relative to, e.g.~function words, we conducted a
further series of comparisons. First, the number of concrete nouns we
tagged in each recording as produced by adults was strongly correlated
with the AWC estimates reported by LENA, Pearson's r(42) = 0.73, p
\textless{} .001. Second, the proportion of concrete nouns produced by
female (0.79) vs.~male speakers (0.21) were highly correlated with the
overall proportion of words produced by female (0.71) vs.~male (0.29)
speakers identified by LENA, Pearson's r(44) = 0.73, p \textless{} .001.
Third, we find that the distribution of utterance-types are convergent
with those reported by \citet{Soderstrom2008}, who used similar
utterance-type categories to analyze speech between mothers and
preverbal infants. Finally, the talker-tags we use from LENA were for
full utterances that included the concrete nouns that the human tags
were based on. Together, this raises our confidence that this subset of
the data is representative of the sample as a whole.

\hypertarget{discussion}{%
\section{Discussion}\label{discussion}}

In the current work, we investigated the LENA algorithm speaker tag
accuracy in a sample of 44 North-American infants at 6 and 7 months of
age. LENA-generated speaker tags for all instances of concrete nouns
spoken to the infants were compared to manual speaker tags generated by
trained human annotators well familiar with each family, who listened to
the recordings in chronological order as the day unfolded. Consistent
with previous validations of the LENA software, we found moderate
overall agreement between the human-generated codes and the
LENA-generated codes, even when limiting our analyses to utterances
containing a specific early-produced part of speech: concrete nouns. To
summarize, accuracy on the four way comparison (adult, child,
electronic, overlap) was reasonably strong (0.72), while accuracy was
quite good for the adult and child comparison (0.90) and the male and
female comparison (0.90). While overall performance was reasonably
strong for the target vs.~other child comparison (0.76), its worth
reiterating that one category (target child) was only used in error by
the software. Finally, accuracy was relatively less strong for the
comparison between electronics and overlap (0.64), a notably difficult
distinction. It's also noteworthy that despite moderate accuracy
overall, there was a very large range of accuracies across the different
categories we examined. This merits further investigation in future
validation efforts, and ideally, in further iterations of language
environment analysis algorithms, which may fruitfully take into account
a broader range or larger contiguous stretches of time within the
training data.

Across all four main categories (adult, child, electronic or overlap),
the LENA software was most accurate at classifying adult speech as adult
speech, and was overly reliant on the overlap category. Indeed, our
human ability to ignore noise is remarkable, and unsurprisingly
difficult for automated analyses: this was clearly acknowledged by
\citet{Xu2009} in the original LENA Technical Report. Overreliance on
the overlap category was also particularly notable in the electronic
vs.~overlap comparisons, where speech coded as electronic by Human
coders was labeled as overlap by the LENA software 40\% of the time. As
also noted by \citet{Xu2008}, differentiating electronic speech from
human speech can be quite challenging, particularly with improving
digital media in recent years. Speculatively, since the LENA system's
central goal is to capture human speech, it's possible the system is
less well-tuned or trained to electronic sound detection, which may also
be sparser or less consistent across instances and recordings. This may
in turn lead to overuse of the \enquote{overlap} category, especially
since if the child wearing the recorder is interacting with electronic
sounds, they are likely also generating noise themselves (either
vocally, or in playing with e.g.~an iPad). Future research is needed to
understand what factors might impact electronic vs.~overlap errors,
e.g.~loudness, especially given increasing research centered on
understanding children's media use \citep{Christakis2009}.

Throughout the results above, Cohen's \(\kappa\) values were often lower
than accuracy. This is almost certainly due to the predominance of
certain categories across our comparisons. For example, as base rates
for different speakers and speaker categories vary, tagging every single
utterance as \enquote{adult} would result in \textgreater50\% accuracy.
In contrast, \(\kappa\) values account for this sort of bias in the
underlying data distribution when assessing performance.

We found lower overall agreement relative to previous validations of
LENA's proprietary software. One possible explanation for this is that
we used a larger amount of data than previous validation efforts, and
that LENA software's accuracy falls off over longer samples, perhaps due
to the wider variability in acoustic environments and situations such
lengthy samples engender. For example, the original Lena Technical
Report \citep{Xu2008} analyzed one hour of data from 70 participants,
while we analyzed an average of 10 hours of data, from two separate
days, for 44 infants, resulting in a difference of 70 hours
vs.~\textasciitilde880 hours. Relatedly, in the current corpus, the
number of speakers ranges from 4-22 across participants, which may
reduce accuracy by introducing larger ranges of non-systematic acoustic
variability. While we do not know the number of speakers present in
previous corpora used for LENA system validations, given the shorter
samples used, it was likely fewer than considered here. The demographic
characteristics of our participant sample also differed from those
reported in the Lena Technical Report \citep{Xu2009}, specifically with
respect to mother's education, which was more variable in the original
technical report. While we find it unlikely that this would have a large
impact on our results, wider validation efforts with more representative
populations would be an important and welcome addition to this
literature.

Our further classification comparisons revealed more details about the
error patterns made by LENA's proprietary software. The algorithm was
found to be highly accurate for classifying adult and child speech, and
male and female speech, though when it did make mistakes it was more
likely to misclassify a child as an adult and female speech as male
speech than the opposite. As it has recently been demonstrated that the
LENA system was more likely to classify male speakers as female when
they were using child directed speech \citep{BergelsonCasillas}, it is
possible that these errors patterns reflect register differences used by
the speaker. This may also extend to classifying child speech as adult
speech; as children have been shown to adapt their speech based on their
interlocutors \citep{Syrett2014, Tomasello1984}, children speaking to
adults may sound more adult-like. While the LENA system does not
currently tag child directed speech vs.~adult directed speech, this
would be a fruitful future direction for algorithmic approaches
\citep[cf.~][]{Schuster2014}.

In contrast, classification of child speech (target child vs.~other
children) was relatively inaccurate, particularly given the age of the
target child (which is information the LENA system gathers before data
processing). Specifically, the algorithm misclassified 410 tokens of
speech produced by other children as being produced by the target child.
By limiting our sample to just infants at 6 and 7 months of age, we
could be sure that the target children in our sample were not producing
words, much less concrete nouns which were the focus of the current
dataset. Nonetheless, as the misclassified tokens make up 24\% of tokens
classified as children by either human coders or the LENA system in the
current sample, it is important for future research to be aware of these
types of mistakes, particularly when the age range of participants
varies widely and it is likely that some portion of participants are not
yet producing words and contributing to the conversation. To be fair,
the LENA algorithm seeks to tag all child vocalizations, not just words.
By focusing only on utterances containing words (and not e.g.~babble),
we limit our assessment of LENA's target vs.~other-child tag accuracy to
a lexical context, rather than examining all child vocalizations. Given
a large focus on early vocabulary differences across populations, we
felt this was a worthwhile analysis to include, but acknowledge that for
other research questions, accuracy when considering the full range of
early vocalizations remains important to establish.

One avenue of improvement in automated analyses would be a way to take
the target child's vocal maturity into account more explicitly, or,
complementarily, adding an explicit parameter that incorporates
family-provided information about how many children are in the
recordings. This may be particularly relevant for gathering accurate
information about language input from families with more children, or in
which caretaking responsibilities include other children \citep[as is
particularly the case for low-SES homes,][]{Division2015}.

Across all comparisons, we also found that utterance-type significantly
predicted accuracy, though ranges in accuracy were too tight in some
cases to merit interpretation. For the four-way comparison (across
adult, child, electronic, and overlap tags), reading and declarative
utterances resulted in the highest classification accuracy, whereas
singing and short phrases resulted in the lowest classification
accuracy. This pattern was consistent for a subset of other comparisons,
likely because reading and declaratives capture a similar set of
intonational contours across age and gender. In contrast, singing is
intrinsically particularly dynamic in pitch and contour. Thus, while we
did not find wholly consistent results across utterance-types across
comparisons, these results do highlight an explanatory role for
utterance-type in classification accuracy. This is important for
researchers to keep in mind, as a benefit of the LENA software is that
it allows for day-long audio recordings, which are inevitably going to
contain variability in utterance-types.

Returning again to our focus on concrete nouns, it remains in principle
possible that this would systematically reduce accuracy in talker tags.
However, the analyses above suggest that concrete nouns are
representative of utterance-type and adult word count distributions more
broadly. Furthermore, given the virtual unavoidability of nouns in
conversational speech, and the prevalence of concrete nouns in input to
infants \citep{Bergelson2018, Roy2015}, we believe that a high
proportion of speech segments used in previous validations is also
likely to contain concrete nouns. Thus, one contribution of the present
work is that we provide results at the daylong scale, across a large
range of talkers, in a specific lexical class.

\hypertarget{practical-implications}{%
\subsection{Practical implications}\label{practical-implications}}

To conclude, we want to first reiterate the difficulty faced by speech
processing softwares, and the ways the LENA software has revolutionized
the field of language acquisition. Without LENA, collecting and
processing naturalistic recordings of children's daily environments
would be impossible for many researchers. Despite the immense benefits,
we have identified some limitations of the LENA talker tags, which
researchers may want to consider when deciding whether human annotations
are necessary to accurately address their research questions.

For researchers interested in the \emph{relative} proportions of speech
produced from males or females, or even from adults and children, the
output created by the LENA software is likely sufficiently accurate
without a need to manually annotate the input.

In contrast, for researchers interested in child vocalization counts or
conversational turns between caregivers and the target child, manually
checking target child vocalizations may be necessary to draw valid
conclusions. While the restricted age range in the current data set does
not allow us to explore whether utterances produced by the target child
are mislabeled as produced by other children, it is reasonable to
believe that this classification error is bidirectional, particularly as
target children get older. Future research is needed to continue to
understand this error pattern, and whether it is more likely to occur in
specific contexts (child directed vs.~adult directed speech, reading
vs.~singing, louder vs.~quieter environments, etc.).

The overreliance on the overlap category may be particularly problematic
for researchers interested in the presence of electronics in the input.
Considering a large proportion of electronic speech in the current
dataset was mistaken for overlap, the proportion of electronic input may
be largely underestimated.

One other limitation of the LENA software generally is that it does not
identify individual speakers, and effectively collapses across all adult
speakers of the same perceived gender, and all non-target children. As
such, researchers interested in the number of talkers present in the
input, the amount of speech produced by different talkers, or comparing
talker variability between- and within- families will need to manually
code the input to obtain this type of information.

Lastly, we want to draw attention to how these results might impact
other automatic measurements produced by LENA, such as adult word counts
and child vocalization counts. As we found that the LENA software was
quite accurate at identifying adult relative to child speech, overall
adult word counts estimates reported by LENA are likely to be largely
unaffected by mistakes in classification accuracy. As noted above, we
did not include any child vocalizations which were not concrete nouns,
and thus we cannot speak to the accuracy of the LENA system identifying
child vocalizations broadly construed. However, the errors found here
for identifying target child speech suggest that child vocalization
counts may be inflated, particularly for younger children.

Taken together, the analyses presented in the current manuscript
reiterate the moderate reliability of the LENA software, while also
highlighting patterns of mistakes that researchers should keep in mind
as they use the LENA system to collect naturalistic day-long recordings.
Knowing about the types of systematic errors the software is likely to
make allows researchers to focus their efforts on manually annotating
variables of interest, while trusting the software to automate the rest
of the process. Despite these error patterns, we maintain that the LENA
system has more advantages than drawbacks, and remains a revolutionary
data collection tool.

\newpage

\begingroup
\setlength{\parindent}{-0.5in}
\setlength{\leftskip}{0.5in}

\hypertarget{refs}{}

\endgroup

\bibliography{r-references.bib,LTR.bib}


\end{document}
